---
layout: blog
date: 2013-10-29-21:53:48
tags: 
title: "Wikipedia Dyslexic Font"
---
I noticed recently, when wasting time, that 
[Wikipedia](http://www.wikipedia.org/) has a special setting to make reading 
the site slightly easier for those with dyslexia.

Dyslexia is a condition that roughly 1 in 25 people have which affects a 
person's ability to read and/or write, and with general comprehension of 
written words. Though there is no "cure", dyslexia not being a disease, but 
simply a natural lack of ability, there are several ways that people employ to 
aid in reading. For example, it has been shown that yellow paper can make it 
easier to follow the letters of words. Whereas normally, the letters can appear 
to move around the page, even as the person is reading them, the different 
background can sometimes help to reduce this effect.

Another method of improving the ease with which the reader can follow words has 
been developed recently. This involves a specifically designed font which has 
certain characteristics that improve its readability for those struggling with 
dyslexia.

Its called [OpenDyslexic](http://opendyslexic.org/) and is described by its 
designers as

>OpenDyslexic is a new open sourced font created to increase readability for 
>readers with dyslexia. The typeface includes regular, bold, italic, and 
>bold-italic styles. It is being updated continually and improved based on 
>input from dyslexic users. There are no restrictions on using OpenDyslexic 
>outside of attribution.

There are not many, as far as I know, sites that have an option to allow 
readers to use this particular alternative font, but Wikipedia being such a 
popular website, I think its likely that some others might follow on. However, 
there has not been a particular enthusiasm for this sort of accessabiulity 
functionality on the web because of the extra effort involved for just a small 
number of people, maybe I'll look into using it on this site.

The setting can be found on almost every Wikipedia page. To enable it click the 
cock icon next to the Languages heading in the left hand side bar. From here 
click on the Fonts heading and choose OpenDyslexic and click Apply Settings. It 
seems to work for multiple languages, though I haven't tried very many.

Good on you Wikipedia.
