---
layout: blog
date: 2013-09-28-09:14:40
tags: computer new hardware ssd
title: "New Computer Excitement"
---
A few weeks ago, I decided that a new computer was needed to replace my aging 
laptop. To this end, I ordered a desktop PC and a couple of days ago it arrived!

I went for a fairly basic model since I never use it for playing games or any 
intensive cpu stuff. This meant that I could do without a dedicated graphics 
card too, saving some extra pounds.

The big thing I decided to change about the configuration was to replace out the 
internal hard disk drive with a solid state drive. Now, SSDs have still not 
caught up with HDDs in terms of size, but what they lack in extent, they more 
than make up for in speediness.

So, I have a meagre 128GB internal hard drive! Some may think that that sounds 
more like going back to the dark ages of computing when a whole gigabyte would 
have been unthinkable over indulgence. In this day of [4TB 
drives](http://www.amazon.co.uk/Western-Digital-MyBook-Essential-External/dp/B0099PFNV8/ref=pd_sim_sbs_computers_5), 
when its possible to store whole movie libraries next to multiple hundred 
thousand songs, 128GB is but a [flash memory 
stick](http://gadgets.boingboing.net/gimages/mechanical-memory-key_1.jpg) useful 
only for carting around a few text files.

Strange that. Cause I'm not sure what else I'd use it for. Most of my work is 
programming, so that means, lots and lots of tiny plain text files and a few 
compiled binaries (even stuff thats not code, I always store in [plain 
text](http://bettermess.com/a-plain-text-primer/)).  So thats 2, maybe 3 GB 
used.  I'll obviously want a few programs installed, but as I've said before, 
lean and fast is my preference, so again, 2 or 3GB will do me fine.  And the 
rest, well thats open to suggestion.  Obviously, I don't want to be filling the 
drive as that can cause performance issues. But I am now pretty much set up with 
all the work that I wanted to bring from my old machine, all the programs I need 
on a regular basis installed, and still, I'm sitting at a comfortable __1%__ of 
the total drive.

Another reason I'm not too bummed out at sacrificing some storage space is the 
speed of SSDs. An SSD is similar to just one big memory stick. Everything is 
solid, there are no moving parts, other than 
[electrons](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Solid-state_drive).  So when you ask 
the computer to find something, like the files needed to start a program, you 
don't have to sit around waiting for mechanical parts to move to the correct 
place and retrieve them.

My boot up time is now under three seconds, any program I care to mention has 
effectively zero lag time. Its wonderful. One downside of this is that I now 
find myself agonising over the time it takes even the fancy new i5 university 
windows computers to do ... anything.

So, thats it. I am very pleased with my new toy, and can wholeheartedly 
recommend [DinoPC](http://dinopc.com) where I bought it.
