---
layout: blog
date: 2013-08-21 12:14:27
tags: todo.txt productivity utf8
title: "Todo with todo.txt"
---
I use the, somewhat, infamous todo list manager [todo.txt](http://todo.txt) to manage my todo
list. `todo.txt` is more of a philosphy, or maybe even just a syntax, for making
it easy to share your todo list around, using different programs on different
devices such that they all have a single purpose and method of handling your
list.

The key ingreident is that the todo list should be nothing more than a flat text
file with one todo item per line. That may seem obvious, or a little trite, but
it makes a huge difference when you use an (almost\[[1][]\]) universally opperable
format, then chuck that file in a Dropbox folder and are able to open, view,
edit and share that same file from anywhere with an internet connection.

My recent forray into getting my todo list under control involved keeping track
of how long it takes to complete tasks. By default, when you invoke it, the todo
list is presented, on the linux commandline, as

	$todo.sh
	1 Go shopping
	2 (A) Phone mum
	3 (C) Buy petrol
	--
	TODO: 3 of 3 tasks shown

Simple. The letter in the brackets is an optional priority marker and the number
is the way you refer to different tasks. So to mark task 1 as complete:

	$todo.sh do 1
	1 x 2013-08-21 Go shopping
	TODO: 1 marked as done.
	x 2013-08-21 Go shopping
	TODO /home/----/.todo/todo.txt archived.

	$todo.sh
	1 (A) Phone mum
	2 (C) Buy petrol
	--
	TODO: 2 of 2 tasks shown

That is showing that task 1 has been marked as done and then moved into the
archive file. When you show the list again, the tasks have moved up and are
ready to be completed.

When you look in the archive file, you'll see, as is shown breifly above, that
each completed task is prepended with the date it was completed. This can be
might useful for looking back to find when you did something. But I wanted a way
to add the date the task was created.

After far too long looking about, I found that, with the help of

	$todo.sh help

you can use the `-t` flag to automatically add the date you create a task to the
task itself. Now, if I need to, I can go to the archive file and see a list of
all my completed tasks with the date created and date completed. One minus the
other gives the length of time required to do that job.

---

####Notes
[1]: #bottom
I say almost because there is still the possibility of encoding differences. I
recently ran into a problem parsing a text file because it was generated by a
server running windows and so was in UTF-16 not
[UTF-8](www.utf8everywhere.org/).
