---
layout: blog
date: 2013-09-05-19:18:29
tags:
title: "New PC Adventure"
---
The computer that I am currently writing this is a Packard Bell Easynote TJ67
and it has served me extremely well for 7 years now. I bought it at a discount
price from the local Comet Electricals, when that still existed, having tried
Ubuntu Linux only once before, with the default installation of Windows 7 Home.

Since then, the superb intel Pentium processor has seen management from Ubuntu,
Lubuntu, Xubuntu, Linux Mint, ArchBang, CrunchBang, PepperMint OS and, of
course, Arch Linux. In the time that I have had this machine, I have completed a
degree in physics, it has run countless simulations, answered thousands of
emails, played host to many games of tetris and been generally a fantastically
loyal, hardworking and reliable laptop computer.

But now, it saddens me to say, that it is time for this old girl to retire from
active service. What with a second degree about to get underway, a new flat, and
a whole new set of adventures, I decided that it was time to update and upgrade,
if only slightly.

I have never been, and don't ever intend to be, a huge pc gamer. I haven't taxed
this laptop with anything mroe intense than [Hedgewars](). As such, and since I
am still a penniless student, I have gone down the economy route in the decision
to buy a replacement.

One of the primary money saving oportunities I saw when starting to look for
options was that I now have very little need, or desire, for windows. I have
access to university computer suites which all run windows (unfortunately) and
have the opportunity to save around Â£50 by not buying a lisence. By this, I
don't mean I shall aquire a license by other, more ilicit methods, but that I
shan't be using windows at all.

I also don't want to have to pay for a huge hard drive, almost everything I deal
with is plain text so doesn't take up much space and I have an external hard
drive for music and a separate one for pictures. And I don't want a super heavy
duty graphics card, or a mightily beefy core i9 or whatever. Basically, I want
another reliable, everyday work horse.

So, I have decidede to go down the specify-your-own-build option. After
searching through a few different "bare-bones" supliers, I have gone for [Dino
PC]() and have chosen a good looking, middle of the range PC with all the fancy
extras *taken out*.

To this beautifully cheap starting block, I have added a swish 128GB SSD, as I
said, I don't need the space and have been thinking of getting a speedy SSD for
a while, a 108.gg wireless card, and a new set of 60W speakers.

I'm now waiting for the big arrival day, when, it goes without saying, the first
job will be to install Arch. I'll update this post then and we'll see how we go.

Fair well from this laptop for one last time. She's been a good friend.
